foreign
by a show of hands how many people feel
that there is a lack of Baraka in their
time raise your hands and people feel
there's a lack of butter in their time
okay excellent and I was reading an
article this week uh in preparation for
for tonight's halaka that
for tonight's halaka tha
the average person that uses social
media will spend two hours a day on on
social media so that's two hours let's
go on on social media and by show of
hands how many people have a Netflix
account or access to a Netflix account
account or access to a Netflix accoun
raise your hands okay you raise two
hands you have two accounts
the average Netflix user in 2020 used
three hours used three hours now there
is that likelihood that perhaps people
are watching Netflix and using social
media at the same time but under the
presumption that they aren't that means
five hours of your 24 hours that
five hours of your 24 hours tha
everyone has is gone towards Netflix and
social media so you have 19 hours to
sleep eat socialize get your work done
and be productive and out the head of
all of them worship Allah and pray and
read your Quran and make your thicker
right so we want to put in front of us
the challenge of using social media and
how it overtakes our lives and we'll be
talking about that today in quite a bit
talking about that today in quite a bi
of detail
but I have a challenge that I want to
partake together as a group I'm not
partake together as a group I'm no
going to tell you what the challenge is
I want to see how many people are going
to participate with me so who's going to
participate with me in the challenge I'm
going to be part of the challenge as
well y'all always going to do this
challenge with me come on guys you want
challenge with me come on guys you wan
to raise your hands everyone raise your
hands if you have a smartphone you're
you're partaking okay how many people
have their screen time on your screen
time is being monitored how many of you
have it on okay for those of you that
have it on okay for those of you tha
don't have it on we're going to turn it
don't have it on we're going to turn i
on right now let's turn it on right now
and next week we're going to compare
numbers okay next week we will compare
numbers of how much screen time we have
used so I turned it on just before the
Holocaust started and inshallah we will
be comparing numbers next week now this
is not uh there's no price if you have
the least amount of of screen time but
the least amount of of screen time bu
be honest with yourself because you
really want to see where does your time
go right we all feel this lack of
buttock in our time we actually want to
see where our time is going and
inshallah through screen time I'm
monitoring that will happen
so with that being said there was one
part that we left off in chapter two
that's where we're going to begin with
and then we'll quickly proceed to three
four and five Within
so the part that we left off in chapter
number two was the part about
number two was the part abou
destructive practices online one of the
most destructive practices online is
trolling and bullying this type of
behavior is contagious and encourages
people to pile on and join in sometimes
anonymously we should resist that
anonymously we should resist tha
behavior even with those that we dislike
even with those that we dislike
you know it's inevitable that being
present on social media you're going to
come across people that you don't like
perhaps these are people that are
criticizing Islam perhaps these are
people that are living a lifestyle that
people that are living a lifestyle tha
you don't agree with anything in fact
you don't agree with anything in fac
frantically disagree with perhaps these
are people just doing foolish things
how you react to these people says more
about you than it does about them and we
have to understand that our Behavior
towards people won't really have much in
an impact in terms of them changing for
the positive right this is the
discussion we were having last week that
discussion we were having last week tha
you could quote all the ayat you could
quote all of your Hadith bring all the
logical proofs on social media and in
the YouTube comments channel it's not
the YouTube comments channel it's no
really going to change people's minds
you want to change people's minds create
your own video create your own form
create your own post that's what's going
to engage people that are sincere in
changing so the point over here that I
want to bring across is that if one of
the best Deeds is to give people nasiha
privately
one of the worst Deeds that you can do
is to troll people and bully people
particularly online particularly when
you're hiding your identity now I know a
lot of people may feel that they need to
hide their identity perhaps for work
reasons perhaps for social reasons
perhaps for the country that they're in
whatever it may be but if that is the
case don't use that to harm someone and
I can't emphasize this enough right like
if you look at the negative impact on
Mental Health that bullying has
particularly online it's actually really
really big you see people start harming
themselves people contemplate suicide it
themselves people contemplate suicide i
destroys people's self constant
destroys people's self constan
confidence and self-esteem all through
that so there has to be an awareness and
inshallah that's one of the the plans
for you know one of the Holocaust that
for you know one of the Holocaust tha
we have free that inshallah we will be
focusing just on this topic of bullying
dealing with bullying in person whether
it is high school and University or even
online
so we want to look at it from that lens
if advising people in private is is one
of the best Deeds understand that
of the best Deeds understand tha
bullying people and trolling people
online is one of the worst and just
online is one of the worst and jus
because you may get away with it in this
Dunya don't think you're going to get
Dunya don't think you're going to ge
away with it in the akhara right that's
one of the points we mentioned last week
that indeed your heart indeed your
hearing and indeed you're speaking and
everything that you do these are all
things that you will be questioned about
things that you will be questioned abou
in the Hereafter
that words are not uttered except that
that words are not uttered except tha
the angels are documenting it and it
the angels are documenting it and i
doesn't matter if you're saying them
through your mouth or through your
typing them these are things that are
being documented and they will be
presented to you on the day of judgment
presented to you on the day of judgmen
which now brings us to chapter number
three chapter number three is about the
phone
how old were you when you got your first
how old were you when you got your firs
phone
I remember when I got my first phone I
was 19 years old I was 19 years old when
I got my first phone how old were you
guys when you got your first phone
17 okay
who else how old you were 20 when you
got your first phone
anyone get their phone when they were 13
years old
13th one person
60 Allah
that's amazing Allah protected you for
for 60 years of your life may he protect
for 60 years of your life may he protec
you for another 60. I mean
okay
there's always this discussion on when
should children get phones and
particularly for the parents in the room
I know this is always on your mind
and you have to look at various
circumstances that come into plan there
is no you know cookie cutter answer for
this situation
so the things that you want to look at
so the things that you want to look a
is is the phone an immediate necessity
for my child right now so for example
are they taking the bus like public
transport to and from school every
single day are they having to walk
um out after Sunset are they having to
go out early in the morning
if they are having to do those things
then yes they need the phone but do they
need a smartphone that is a separate
question do they need a smartphone that
question do they need a smartphone tha
is a separate question right so the
conversation we want to have is when
should your child get a smartphone
your child should get a smartphone once
you have ingrained the topic of taqwa
inside of them once you've ingrained the
topic of taqwa inside of them meaning
that you had a discussion with them this
is who Allah is and Allah knows
everything that you're doing and knows
everything that you think and knows
everything that you feel and you have to
ingrain taqwa inside of them the second
thing you have to do is make sure you
have a discussion with them with regards
to who they are going to be interacting
with so they should only interact with
people that they already know don't
people that they already know don'
interact with strangers just like you
don't want your children interacting
with strangers in real life you don't
with strangers in real life you don'
want them interacting with strangers
online because there are terrible
terrible things that happen in the
online space number three what are the
things that they're going to be sharing
what are the things that they're going
to be sharing online as we mentioned
last week that once you put something
online it's going to be there forever
right so you have to be very very
careful that you're not going to share
something that can compromise you and
compromising can be such a a generic
term but I want us to look at examples
of mothers that share pictures of their
kids as they're dropping them off to
school you know they're like yeah first
school you know they're like yeah firs
day of school I love my child X Y and Z
but now if someone's stalking you they
know what school your child goes to and
they know what your child looks like
right and they don't even have to do any
research whatsoever
so someone comes up to them he's like
yeah I'm a a friend of your moms and
they know all the mom's history through
Instagram the food that she likes the
the clothes that she wears X Y and Z and
all of a sudden the child is going to
believe them right so things that can
compromise you are not just about the
standard things that can compromise you
they're even the general things that can
compromise your privacy so all of those
things you want to discuss with your
child before you even contemplate giving
them a phone then number two are they
mature and are they responsible are they
showing that they can handle
responsibility are they showing that
responsibility are they showing tha
they can handle accountability
they show that then give them limited
amount of access to their fault so for
example when they're out of the house
they can have it but once they come home
the phone gets taken away from them no
phones in the bedroom night time comes
you leave the phone downstairs to charge
and that is where it stays so those are
the things that you need to think about
the things that you need to think abou
as you give your child the phone in an
Ideal World if you can delay social
media usage as much as possible
I believe I firmly believe in that
I believe I firmly believe in tha
number two is the type of social media
that they use I also believe in that so
for example if you can restrict your
child to like Twitter alhamdulillah like
what 14 year old wants to be on Twitter
right but they want to be on Tick Tock
they want to be on Discord they want to
be on Snapchat those are the things that
be on Snapchat those are the things tha
you want to be very very careful of if
they're going to use them open phone
policy access parent asks for the phone
at any one given time the parents should
be able to view it no discussions asked
so those are just some guidelines as to
when you should give your child a phone
so now
let's talk about things that have
changed through the presence of
smartphones
so before the presence of smartphones
you wanted to hang out with someone
you're like hey I'm coming over you go
over to their place you hang out
over to their place you hang ou
but now with the presence of smartphones
you want to game together you can game
together from the comfort of your own
homes you want to watch a movie you can
watch a movie together from the comfort
watch a movie together from the comfor
of your own homes whatever you want to
do doesn't really require physical
interaction and this is a huge thing
that has changed right now this is a
huge thing that has changed right now
one of the most difficult things to do
is that when you're invited to a wedding
and you get placed at a table where you
don't know anyone at all
and you're like man you know the right
and you're like man you know the righ
and the groom must really hate me that
and the groom must really hate me tha
they put me on this table so now before
smartphones you're forced to converse
with everyone you can't just sit there
silently there's nothing else to do so
you have to talk to people you socialize
and you learn and you benefit and you
grow and you interact but now with the
presence of smartphones
any time you don't want to interact you
can just pretend you're doing something
on your phone even if the battery is
dead right like one of the best things
to do is that if you take public
transport put on your headphones even if
there's nothing on No One's Gonna bother
trying to talk to you because they're
going to assume that you are you know
listening to something or that you're
doing something so you can prevent
doing something so you can preven
socialization altogether
and that has had an impact so if you
remember last week we briefly spoke
about how people are more virtually
connected but now feel lonelier than
ever
why is that because the online social
media space does not allow for deep
intimate connection which requires
multiple interactions over time in
situations where you can grow together
like the statement of um of eating
together doing business together
traveling together and sleeping in the
same compound or same confined area
together
so now what we want to look at is what
so now what we want to look at is wha
is the trade-off that is taking place so
constant engagement on the phone has
created a trade-off in these casual
social settings where we would normally
meet new people we converse less with
those seated next to us on a plane or
with our Barber or even with a fellow
dinner guest at someone's home
so now this concept of you know nothing
is ever free in life
I want to make it more specific
nothing is free of consequences nothing
is free of consequences no matter what
is free of consequences no matter wha
decision you make no matter what action
you take there will always be a
consequence and a ramification of it so
the time you decided to upgrade to a
smartphone
there are going to be ramifications and
consequences to it now what is the
trade-off for us being more virtually
connected for us being more virtually
connected responding to text messages
while conversing with someone is now
viewed by many people to be completely
normal and acceptable regardless it does
create some tricky situations when is it
create some tricky situations when is i
appropriate to respond to a message or
glance at a message what about talking
what about taking a phone call what
what about taking a phone call wha
about taking a picture so the
consequences of having a smartphone
is that there's this concept of capital
on social media that concept of capital
on social media how many followers you
have how many likes you get how many
messages you're getting how many
interactions you're getting how many
views you're getting this is all
considered capital on social media
so back in the day when we wanted to
look at someone's status you look at how
much wealth a person has this person is
worth x amount of money and therefore
they are socially more powerful they
have clout in society that is all
drastically changed now to how many
followers do you have on social media to
how many followers do you have on social
media what that has done is that once we
have created that as a form of capital
just like Mankind and Humanity loves
money
then similarly mankind will now crave
likes views and interactions
what that does on a personal level is
that we can no longer be engaged with
long conversations that are deep and
intimate
because we want to see that that last
because we want to see that that las
picture that I posted did someone
comment on that did someone like it I
need to know instantaneously and it's
created this desire for instantaneous
gratification right this concept of
being bored does not exist and we'll
talk about that shortly this constant of
delayed gratification does not exist we
want everything here
right now as soon as possible in the
best way possible so now let's try to
answer some of these questions
so imagine
you're at a coffee shop with a friend
you haven't seen them in a long time
you get a text message
you don't know who it's from
at what point do you check who it's from
what are the guidelines
what do you do
you just check it at any time
no you don't you're shaking your head
Bismillah you're the first one to answer
so when do you when when do you check it
uh if it's getting to a point where oh
hold on let me show you a picture of my
cat and maybe a glass and see who who
messaged you at that time so you want to
look for a break you want to judge what
look for a break you want to judge wha
type of conversation it is
you also want to see who you're actually
sitting and having coffee with as well
right like how important and valuable is
that conversation anyone have something
else to add
at what point would you check a text
at what point would you check a tex
message or a or you know a notification
go ahead
righ
of course so if your phone starts going
off I 100 agree you know something could
be going on someone's trying to get in
touch with you urgently that does
require you know checking your your
device at that time but for this
scenario we're just talking like a
one-off text message a one-off text
one-off text message a one-off tex
message what do you do in that situation
so let's look at one prophetic mentality
and this is an important takeaway that
and this is an important takeaway tha
we're taking away from chapter number
three
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
when someone said assalamu alaikum to
him as he was walking
he would turn his full body towards them
face them and give them his undivided
attention and give them his undivided
attention and this could be from his
best friends like Abu Bakr and Omar or
his wife
or this could be even the companion that
or this could be even the companion tha
literally we know nothing about the
prophet sallallahu treated everyone
fairly in this respect so the point over
here is the concept of respecting people
needs to be brought back so the general
rule is you don't want to be checking
your notifications you don't want to be
checking your emails you don't want to
be checking your social media as you're
interacting with someone
so if the conversation comes to an end
and you're parting ways by all means at
and you're parting ways by all means a
the end of the conversation check your
phone if your phone starts going off
like someone's trying to call you two or
three times in a row or you're getting
like 10 15 text messages in a row and
this is like a problem as well the other
of text messaging you know we have
certain people that they'll text message
you like one word at a time please don't
you like one word at a time please don'
do that please type the whole paragraph
and then send it you'll make people's
lives so much easier like I keep
thinking subhanallah
just to go on a bit of a tangent it's
like no matter how many times you tell
people before Salah please turn off your
phones to put it on silent there'll
always be one brother or one sister that
always be one brother or one sister tha
manages to ignore this notification and
ends up leaving it on and it's just
ends up leaving it on and it's jus
purely from the Qatar of Allah that
purely from the Qatar of Allah tha
because they left it on their friend is
going to call them or they're going to
get text messages and in those moments
subhanallah those people that text one
word at a time it just goes ding ding
ding ding ding ding and I'm like man
Miss Keen this Poor's being the person
is being embarrassed in Salah and the
person sending the message is just
person sending the message is jus
making it worse you know because it just
making it worse you know because it jus
keeps going off so now a brief flicker
point over here
in your Salah if your phone starts
ringing or you haven't put it on silent
ringing or you haven't put it on silen
it will not nullify your Salah if you
put it on silent or if you turn it off
right just pushing the power off button
it won't nullify yourself or if you have
like uh you know on the iPhones they
have the sound button if you just turn
that sound button off in the Salah it's
not going to nullify your Salah so that
not going to nullify your Salah so tha
is something that's actually encouraged
to do that as soon as it goes off you
know just do that right away just do
that right away and also take heed of
the Imam statement right the Imam is not
the Imam statement right the Imam is no
just saying it for the sake of having
fun turn off your phones or put it on
silent it's for the sake of avoiding
destruction so now going back to this
point of respect that when you're with
someone you want to give them undivided
attention as long as it's possible and
as long as is possible and we can talk
about some of the things that you can do
uh you know we'll be talking about that
uh you know we'll be talking about tha
I believe in chapter number five
yeah
correc
ly
everyone not nullify your soul I will
not impact your Salah
because it's not a permanent thing that
because it's not a permanent thing tha
you're doing right so it's just like you
sneeze if you cover your mouth in your
in your sajdah it's not going to nullify
your your your Salah right so in that
your your your Salah right so in tha
sort of situation you're just quickly
moving your hand and you bring it back
but if you make the intention that you
know what I'm not going to put all seven
positions on the floor then that's where
you're sinful and that's that well
that's what will nullify your Salah so
anything that you do for a greater
benefit or greater cause is is not a
problem at all inshallah
type so that's one thing about etiquette
a second thing uh about etiquette is
tha
perhaps sometimes you're in a gathering
there are quite a few people around us
and we'll start talking about other
people via text message so you're at
people via text message so you're a
someone's house and you start texting
your friend and I I don't know what what
your friend and I I don't know what wha
guys would do in this situation but this
seems more like something that uh uh a
group of sisters might do like hey did
you see her shoes hey did you see her
dress hey did you see her hijab and that
dress hey did you see her hijab and tha
sort of thing now you may be thinking
what's the big deal of doing something
like that you know it's not really
backbiting that's fine we're not going
to talk about the issue of backbiting
because it may be relevant but it may
not be relevant but what is relevant is
this Hadith
where he says when three people are
sitting together then two of them should
not hold a secret conversation a
excluding the third person way to be in
a larger group so as not to upset
a larger group so as not to upse
another person so as to not upset
another person so as to not upse
another person meaning that imagine if
you're on a table again going back to
this wedding scenario you're at a table
you're one of your friends is on the
opposite side of the table and you're
with a group of people that are unknown
and you guys are just texting each other
back and forth according to this Hadith
this is bad Adam this is bad etiquette
because you want to make everyone feel
included there is a responsibility that
included there is a responsibility tha
we have of making people feel welcome of
making people feel welcome and if you're
just putting yourself into your phone
and you're conversing privately with
another person then that is something
that is considered disrespectful
islamically that is something I just
islamically that is something I jus
considered disrespectful islamically
a third matter of
etiquette
how many of you know someone so this is
not you but you know someone that takes
their phone to the bathroom that takes
their phone to the bathroom
reality right that is a reality I want
reality right that is a reality I wan
us to reflect on the fact that the
prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam he
teaches us to say Allah
if before we enter the bathroom meaning
that oh Allah I seek refuge in you from
these filthy gen that are that are
present over here what does that teach
us that you want to spend the least
us that you want to spend the leas
possible amount of time
in the washroom now here we can address
the guys guys naturally will make take
more time in the washroom ask any wife
they'll testify to this subhanallah you
add even more time if you have your
phone with you that 20 minutes now turns
into an hour if you have to take a
shower on top of that
shower on top of tha
an hour and a half is gone right so you
don't want to be taking your phone with
you and there's multiple reasons here
there's multiple reasons here number one
is just the time
number two mashallah you're all
practicing you know observant people
over here so when you're on social media
you're going to be reading reminders
you're going to be listening to
reminders you're going to be exposed to
verses of the Quran and those are not
verses of the Quran and those are no
things you should be exposed to in the
bathroom those are it's part of the the
other and the etiquette of the zikr of
Allah and the verses of the of the Quran
that they shouldn't be recited there
they shouldn't be recited over there so
that's a second reason not to do so and
then the third and last reason is that
then the third and last reason is tha
again so much time is just completely
wasted that could be doing other things
right that time could be spent with your
family that time could be doing work
that time could be doing so many other
things so look at not only the the the
extra amount of time you're spending in
the washroom but also the loss of
productivity the loss of productivity so
that is a third adab and educate it you
need to be careful of a fourth thing
that you know we'll talk briefly as a
tangen
When We Touch a must-have
we require having wudu according to the
majority of Scholars if you're going to
touch a must-have you are required to
have Voodoo but how about if you're
reading Quran of an app on your phone
are you required to have Udo at that
are you required to have Udo at tha
time the answer is no you're not
time the answer is no you're no
required to have Udo so we differentiate
between the musaf and the phone even
though you may be doing the exact same
thing now what are some of the things
that we can do to increase our hasanat
that we can do to increase our hasana
through our phones to increase our
russianat through our phones
number one set up reminders for yourself
to do good deeds so for example
Thursday night comes put a reminder on
your phone that I need to recite short I
need to send Salah and Salam upon the
prophet Muhammad
before the time of Maghrib I need to
take some time out on Friday to make Dua
to Allah
right so all of these things that you
can take advantage of you should do
number two
put on the Adan app on your phone make
sure that at least you get some sort of
notification for Salah timings
particularly in the winter time it's
tough man it's really really tough like
door comes you start an assignment and
all of a sudden I smoke them and you're
like man what happened to the time of
Assad right that's just the way it
Assad right that's just the way i
happens so at least when you're getting
a notification for your Salas it will
give you an opportunity to make sure
that those Salas aren't missed
particularly in these winter months
and then one of the best things that I
think a person can do is that as we set
think a person can do is that as we se
up reminders throughout the day and like
every day have a standard portion of you
know what in this half an hour of the
day I'm going to recite Quran in this
half an hour of the day I'm going to
listen to a lecture in this half an hour
of the day I'm going to be making vicar
and you want to make the most of your
time that way you want to be make the
most of your time that way
now the last point I want to discuss
with regards to respect
with regards to respec
is remember when we were talking about
is remember when we were talking abou
interacting with people
one of the worst things a child can do
and this applies to all of us here is
when your parent is trying to talk to
you
but your head is in the phone
I want us all to make a firm intention
that the next time that any one of our
parents is speaking to us will try our
utmost at best to put our phones down if
you're doing something important
you're doing something importan
politely tell your mother and father my
dear Mother my dear father let me just
dear Mother my dear father let me jus
finish this task let me just finish this
conversation and I'll be with you right
conversation and I'll be with you righ
away
but if they are just talking and talking
and talking and you think it's enough to
keep nodding your head to show that
keep nodding your head to show tha
you're paying attention this is not the
respect that your parents deserve this
is not the respect that your parents
deserve now they have action items in
the book let's look at these action
items action item number one look for
creative ways to remove phones from
social interactions many live shows such
as stand-up comedy shows require
audience members to lock their phones in
special pouches instead of selfie
stations host photo free Gatherings one
solution people have tried at
solution people have tried a
restaurants
to stack phones at the center of the
table and if anyone reaches for their
phone during dinner they have to pay the
full bill I love this idea so this
concept of phone free zones I think this
is amazing like I think
if we did our due diligence at the
Masjid as people are walking in we have
those pouches put your phone in the
pouch you get it on your way out and if
it wasn't as crowded and if people
aren't as much in a hurry I think it
aren't as much in a hurry I think i
would have worked really well but try
this in your own homes like have rules
that when it comes time to dinner take
away the phones take away the devices
you don't need your iPad you don't need
your phone when we're having dinner
right at night time try our utmost best
right at night time try our utmost bes
to just you know keep it away from you
it'll help you sleep better like one of
the worst things that we do for our
sleep
is to have access to our phones right
is to have access to our phones righ
the last thing you do before you go to
bed check your notifications check your
emails the first thing you do when you
wake up check your emails check your
notifications that's the reality of Life
bring some peace to your life by taking
it away
and also try this thing at the
restaurant like I think that's a great
restaurant like I think that's a grea
thing let's see how addicted we all are
are we willing to pay everyone's bill
that night let's do it number two
force yourself to put your phone away
when talking to others even in casual
settings like speaking to a clerk at a
store
so you go to a store put your phone away
if you're talking to someone put your
phone away and I wanted to mention
something over here subhanallah I make
an intention to share this every jummah
but my dear brothers
when you come to jummah while the Imam
is talking you're not allowed to text
is talking you're not allowed to tex
you're not allowed to look at social
media you're not allowed to respond to
emails right it'll take away from the
other of your jummah and a lot of times
people think that the Imam can't see
what they're doing trust me the Imam
sees everything that you're doing even
the guy in the back that is like trying
to take a nap in text at the same time
the Imam sees you and it's not even
about the Imam seeing you that it's
being disrespectful when you should be
paying full attention but at the end of
the day it's about your own right you
came to Jamar to get your Ajit why are
you going to diminish from your Aja if
you're texting on your phone if you
really really have an urgent call or
like something an emergency happens get
like something an emergency happens ge
up of the Gathering leave take your
phone call come back that is the proper
etiquette but to like pick up your phone
and start talking
for the honestly for the I remember one
incident this is when we were uh praying
Juma at uh at the Ramada Hotel Sheikh
Hasan is giving the this brother sitting
in the first row and he picks up the
phone then he starts talking in the
middle of Juma and I'm like what is
happening like what are you doing like
if you call us I understand it could be
an emergency we're not judging the phone
call but if you need to take it don't do
it there get up and walk out take the
phone call come back subhanallah so yeah
like even in jummah you ought to make
sure you uh you turn that uh off with
the light
the ligh
chapter number four reflect
chapter number four reflec
so now this topic of reflection is
actually a very very deep one and we're
going to start off
with this discussion that as Believers
we're meant to be people that reflect
we're meant to be people that reflec
right Allah he tells us subhana
like if you look at this verse Allah he
tells us in the creation of the heavens
and the earth and the alternation of the
of the day and the night there are signs
for people who reflect and these people
they will be remembering Allah standing
sitting and laying down and they will
say oh Allah you did not create this in
vain meaning that there are people that
vain meaning that there are people tha
are contemplative and they like to
reflect they like to reflect so this is
who the Believers are meant to be this
is who the Believers are meant to be so
now what we want to reflect on
is what are our phones doing to us what
is what are our phones doing to us wha
is our social media doing to us so I
want to give you an example this is the
example actually in the book that uh our
brother omarosman uh poses over here
so you have your alarm on forfeiture you
had a really late night let's just say
you were busy working on an assignment
you were busy working on an assignmen
and you've pressed the news the last 10
minutes later snooze again snooze again
snooze again and now you have half an
hour left till shurok till the Sun is
going to rise
until you start things final I should
really get up but this time when the
alarm goes off rather than turning it
alarm goes off rather than turning i
off you just like smack it but it didn't
off you just like smack it but it didn'
turn off so you slowly starts to get up
you grab your phone now and you start to
see you know 27 email notifications you
know 10 Facebook notifications five
Instagram notifications 20 Twitter
notifications
as soon as you see that what's going to
happen at that time
if you think about the command of the
Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam where
if you are sitting in a gathering and
you're hungry and dinner has been served
and the call to Salah comes
should you answer the call to Salah or
should you eat at that time
tells us to eat why
because you will be distracted in your
Salah by your hunger you will be
distracted in your Salah by your hunger
what is the kriyas being made over here
that now that you have to pray Fajr and
you've seen 27 email notifications how
many social media notifications what's
going to happen in Salah
shaytan is going to come to you and is
going to say Hey what if you have an
important email
or hey what if x y z person that you're
following you know posted a comment on
one of your pictures
or what if you want to make it more
dramatic what if that sister that you're
considering to propose to she liked your
picture
is really going to mess you with your
head and that is why the prophet
head and that is why the prophe
salallahu alaihi wasallam commands us to
mitigate the notification commands as to
mitigate the reasons of Destruction in
Salah so now what that means is that if
you've created this opportunity for
shaitaan you've empowered him over you
you've empowered him over you
food is a survival for necessity social
media is not a survival for necessity so
what ends up happening whether we like
it or not will justify it to ourselves
okay you know what let me just quickly
go through everything quickly go through
our emails and you know he posts
something really funny he's like when
was the last time you actually got a
personal email that was important no one
gets personal emails that are important
gets personal emails that are importan
anymore like work emails yes personal
emails no so you go through all of your
emails you go through all of your
notifications you go through everything
and then you're like oh yeah I still
have to pray fudge it but that shouldn't
have to pray fudge it but that shouldn'
be the way life is that shouldn't be the
way that our lives are run so we want to
reflect on the impact that it's having
on our engagement with Allah
he says every wakeful moment we have is
dedicated to being busy in some capacity
right we always constantly want to look
busy you know subhanallah there's a show
that I grew up watching called Seinfeld
and uh so you may watch it or may know
of it and George Costanza you know he's
like the master con man so every time
his boss would look by or walk by he
always pretends to look busy even though
he's never doing any work as well this
guy's a genius like he managed to build
a bed underneath his desk and he will
take naps underneath his desk but that's
like a tangent so the point being like
if we've created this culture of I
always need to be busy I always need to
be engaged in something
but is that the prophetic mentality
the answer is no
the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
before Revelation before revelation
he used to go into the mountains and sit
he used to go into the mountains and si
in a cave
isolate and contemplate
no distractions
nothing to to do with the outside world
just focus on being present focus on the
existence of Allah and now after
Revelation it's about your zikr it's
about your Quran recitation it's about
about your Quran recitation it's abou
what good deeds can you do what Dua can
I make right I want us to think about
I make right I want us to think abou
some of the bad habits that have been
created with regards to our zika that
created with regards to our zika tha
Salah finishes as soon as Allah finishes
you have your phone in one hand you're
making Victor in the other hand how
sincere is your liquor
right you're trying to make Dua you're
making Dua but you're also like
scrolling through Instagram
how genuine is your Dua at that time now
obviously that is still better than not
obviously that is still better than no
making Dua not making thicker but we're
talking about how do we go back to the
norm how do we elevate it right so it
norm how do we elevate it right so i
starts with reflecting on the impact
starts with reflecting on the impac
that these phones are having on our
lives
so when we were talking about trade-offs
one of the trade-offs of social media is
that all of our free time gets consumed
with it all of our free time gets
consumed with it so what is a good
practice with regards to social media
here's a couple of things I want to
share with you number one
turn off your notifications and I mean
like don't even allow it to take place
on your phone so if you're getting an
email it shouldn't show up on your phone
something happened on Facebook Instagram
Twitter any social media you shouldn't
Twitter any social media you shouldn'
get the notification why because that
get the notification why because tha
way you'll continuously keep checking
that way you'll continuously keep
checking
and then what you do is number two a
large time
for checking your emails and doing
social media checking so remember those
38-minute slots that we were talking
about put a 30 minute slot that you know
what during this 30 minute slot I'll
check my emails during this 30 minute
slot I'll check my social media and if
you want to take it even deeper
and this is like when you look at these
individuals that are considered life
hackers they're trying to hack their way
through life by optimizing as much as
possible and living as long as possible
all of these people if they're present
all of these people if they're presen
on social media
they won't be using it on their phones
in fact they'll make it a general rule
they'll only use social media on their
desktops or on their laptops and you'll
only use the social media that is
relevant to them into their business
right so they won't have the useless
ones that they don't use
right like the mistake that we make is
that we want to have everything we want
that we want to have everything we wan
to have Tick Tock we want to have
Instagram we want to have Snapchat so
that as you're sitting through the
toilet the Instagram feed finishes okay
let's check Tick Tock now Tick Tock feed
finishes now okay let's go to Snapchat
finishes now okay let's go to Snapcha
Snapchat finishes now okay let's go to
Twitter Twitter finishes now okay let's
check the news news finishes now dude
what else is left Habibi get up and wash
yourself and go right and this is the
reality this is the reality so the third
hack is that if you can avoid using
social media on your phone that is one
of the best favors that you will do and
then number four only use the social
medias that you actually need to use and
by need I mean like
for a young person your closest friends
that they're on this one social media
and you want to interact with them use
that social media get rid of the rest
that social media get rid of the res
right save your time it is worth more
than anything else
now I want to share this quote with you
that he shares he says as we Embrace a
Technology's gift we usually fail to
consider what they ask from us in return
the subtle hardly noticeable payments we
make in exchange for their marvelous
service we don't notice for example that
service we don't notice for example tha
the gaps in our schedules have
disappeared because you're too busy
delighting in the amusements that fill
them we forget the games that childhood
boredom forged because boredom itself
has been outlawed why would we bother to
register the end of solitude of
ignorance of luck why would we care that
ignorance of luck why would we care tha
an absence has disappeared right so this
is just talking about how free time has
completely disappeared because social
media has filled that Gap has filled
that Gap now we must intentionally
choose in every single moment which
connections matter right this goes back
to the point that I was mentioning
choose the social medias that matter the
most limit their usage and inter action
and make the most of your time because
at the end of the day when you're
questioned by Allah
what did you do in your youth
and acceptable response is not I was
checking my social media and if we're
spending two hours a day Allahu Akbar
are we spending that same amount just in
Salah are we spending that same amount
Salah are we spending that same amoun
adding in the amount of zikr and Quran
that we're saying to our Salah does that
that we're saying to our Salah does tha
even add up to two hours
right that's something to think about
right that's something to think abou
that's something to think about we
aren't able to give the remembrance of
Allah the attention it needs because we
dedicate our cognitive energy elsewhere
meaning that your mind it has a limited
amount of capacity right it has a
limited amount of energy before itself
feels drained and this is not like
physical exhaustion where your body is
tired this is mental exhaustion because
your mind has been worked already so
it's like over sensory loaded with all
of the pictures with all the sounds with
all the news it just needs it's just
all the news it just needs it's jus
tired it needs a break and you'll notice
that that when that happens you're no
longer productive you can't engage in
thicker you can't recite Quran because
all those things require mental capacity
Harris also notes just as every
technology is an invitation to enhance
some part of our Lives it also
necessarily is an invitation to be drawn
away from something else so the more you
are drawn to your phone
think the opposite of it the more you're
drawn away from the remembrance of Allah
and from productivity the more you join
away from the rents of Allah and from
productivity
so we have to create moments of Solitude
so you have to create moments for
yourself or you know what I'm not going
to touch my phone I'm not going to be
engaged in anything this is just pure my
time with Allah to reflect make zika and
make Dua and these aren't things that I
can multitask right these are things
that I have to focus on because my
spiritual well-being is just as
important if not more important than my
physical well-being and my phone is
having an impact on my spiritual
well-being and subhanallah you may not
well-being and subhanallah you may no
realize this
but this concept of desensitization
particularly to the way women are
dressed on social media it has an impact
dressed on social media it has an impac
on us brothers that we need to take
seriously the words that we hear on
social media in the name of pulling a
prank in the name of observing a funny
clip these are all things that we get
clip these are all things that we ge
desensitized to then all of a sudden you
start saying a swear word and you're
like man where did this come from that's
not the language that I speak but it's
because we become desensitized to it and
eventually over exposure will naturally
make it a part of your vocabulary
and he concludes by saying we have to
reclaim our Expendable hours and make
them ours essential to our connection
with Allah so his action items number
one reflect what trade-offs you have
made for social media have you noticed a
direct impact in your relationship with
Allah means to always pay attention to
the impact that social media is having
on your relationship with Allah number
two block out timings throughout the day
as white space that are screen free
suggestions include blocking the first
suggestions include blocking the firs
three to thirty minutes after waking up
and 30 minutes before going to sleep
social media phone free zones number
three use a physical copy of the Quran
instead of an app okay let's stop here
for a second
why do you think he's saying he was a
physical copy of the Quran as opposed to
an app what could the wisdom be
distraction 100 you're trying to read
Quran in your app notifications are
going off text messages are coming in
you're like kalas it's gone it's done
right whereas if you're reading a
physical Quran you're not distracted by
anything else you get to focus on the
Quran alone when reading and using a
handwritten Dua list for making Dua
these will eliminate distractions and
help you focus
how are we for time age 38 okay let's
finish this laptops last chapter and
we'll conclude chapter number five is
takathor chapter number five actually
you know what
you know wha
anyone want to share something with
regards to spirituality and relationship
with Allah and social media anyone have
any comments or thoughts on this topic I
know it's very vague and very Broad and
maybe something doesn't come to the
Forefront of your mind but I want to
give you an opportunity to talk about
give you an opportunity to talk abou
tha
like what do you think the ramifications
of social media on our relationship with
Allah
what impact is social media go ahead
sure
yeah
foreign
excellent question so the brother's
question are these short clips that are
30 to 60 seconds long replacing the need
for education and I think a lot of that
for education and I think a lot of tha
will come with the mentality that people
have right so if people have this
mentality that you know what by watching
a 30 to 60 second clip I've learned all
the religious knowledge that I need
that's a disaster not in the clip itself
but in the mindset that we have right
but in the mindset that we have righ
even though it's not an authentic Hadith
the concept is very true you seek
knowledge from the Cradle to the Grave
right so this concept of constantly
learning that is the mindset that we
should have and I get it we can't listen
to to our lectures and I felt so bad and
I apologize for last week we went on for
an hour and 22 minutes I will try not to
do that this tonight
do that this tonigh
I understand not everyone has the
capacity for that but if you're going to
focus on learning be genuine sincere
with yourself
take time out for 30 minutes find a
30-minute lecture on something that you
want to learn about take out your phone
if you want to take notes or tell you
even better take out a pen and a pad so
that you're away from all distractions
listen and take notes right you know if
you go back to traditional learning they
used to say
right that knowledge is this wild beast
right that knowledge is this wild beas
and the only way that you tame this wild
beast is by documenting it and by
writing it down right so if our
intention really is to seek knowledge
then it has to be done properly it can't
then it has to be done properly it can'
just be you know what these 30 to 60
second Eclipse now the Merit of those 30
to 60 second clips though is that
to 60 second clips though is tha
sometimes you need a good deeds to do
like right away like I I I'm gonna give
a shout out to my to my boy for those of
you that may follow him on on Tick Tock
or Instagram like what he does from once
in a while he'd be like my brothers and
sisters if you're watching right now
repeat after me and you'll be like this
most recent one was
and like those 60 seconds you've just
and like those 60 seconds you've jus
done the good deed and he just
done the good deed and he jus
accumulated like a million masha'allah
so if you're looking for that that's
perfectly fine
but if you're actually going to be
seeking a learning Islam assalamualaikum
assalamualaikum
uh if you're actually going to try to
learn Islam be genuine and sincere with
yourself and that's the way to do it
yourself and that's the way to do i
yeah
as a phone
I wish she kind of gets me very good
because
all night
all nigh
to my friend on the phone about this
problem over and over it never goes away
I never get a chance to review this
person human rights I lost it yeah
[Music]
yeah make it easy so this brother's
question is about to how shaytan gets
the best of all of us and when we have
the opportunity to do something more
productive shaitaan brings us to
something less productive so the answer
to this goes back to that concept of
structuring your time so if you have an
eight hour you know limit that you're
working with
then break down your time that you know
what for this half an hour I'll recite
Quran for this half an hour I'll speak
to my friend for this half an hour I'll
watch a lecture for this half an hour
I'll go on to social media for this half
an hour I'll go take a walk and make
zika like that's what you need to do and
just to be added me to buy it right you
have to hold yourself accountable for
that you have to hold yourself
accountable for that
accountable for tha
this is my last one
foreign
I use them Allah
uncle but that is so much easier said
than done right to say that I control my
phone and my phone does not control me
very easy to say very hard to do very
easy to say very hard to do right and
this is like remember last week we were
talking about those people that are born
after 1985. that they've lived a life
before the onset of a smartphone they
know what life was like and they can
remember what life was like but after
1985 if you ask these young kids they
know what is life like without a
smartphone it is their lives right
smartphone it is their lives righ
everything revolves around it so now we
can't take it away because it's almost a
necessity of life but what we want to do
is establish these guidelines and
principles to uh mitigate to the harm as
much as possible
chapter number five is uh is a
relatively short one
who knows what a cathor means from Surah
to takathur
what does it takeator mean
what did you say
a desire for increase a mutual rivalry
or competition where you compete with
people for more right so Allah he tells
us
that you will continue to compete with
people up and until you visit the graves
up and until you visit the graves so now
what he tries to do in this setting or
in this chapter
is he wants to talk about that concept
is he wants to talk about that concep
of capital again so that concept of
capital where people are craving likes
and desires what
and desires wha
how does that translate into social
media so if people are constantly
competing for wealth and children as is
part of the Quran
we add that now into likes interactions
views comments and so on and so forth so
the new social media as a new form of
currency which is attention this is
measured in likes comments shares and
followers right we compete with one
another over these metrics and the most
another over these metrics and the mos
powerful of people are those that have
the largest follows and we actually
discussed a lot of this already
so what we want to take away from this
now
is
how often do we do things
for the sake
of purely just posting them
on social media
right so for example uh I don't know if
we have such a place here in uh in
Calgary but in Los Angeles there's like
this mural of like angel wings people
will specifically go there so that they
can stand in the middle grab a picture
and you know what they went there just
and you know what they went there jus
for the sake of taking a picture or like
if you go to uh like the Leaning Tower
of Pisa or to the Eiffel Tower people
put their thumbs away from a distance as
if they're holding it the only reason
they went like 200 meters away from the
actual Tower is to take that picture so
that they can post it on social media so
going back to intentionality that we
were talking about last week
what are our intentions for the things
that we do in our lives now how much of
it is dictated by purely just sharing
that on social media versus going there
to experience things and enjoy the
things that we're doing so that's what
things that we're doing so that's wha
we want to discuss within so he says
over here if we see someone post photos
from a new park we have to visit it and
post a photo from the exact same spot if
a new restaurant opens up that is
trending on social media we rush to
visit and take our photos before the
hype dies down sometimes the
documentation can start with a noble
intention and then becomes problematic
consider the case of people documenting
charity work such as feeding the
homeless it can serve as something that
homeless it can serve as something tha
helps an organization build credibility
share the good work being done and
encourage support for the cause left
encourage support for the cause lef
unchecked it can also become a source of
self-addulation and Shifting the focus
from helping the people to lauding the
one that is doing the helping so let's
take this chapter this paragraph over
here
you know the iic once a month we go to
the Calgary Drop in Center alhamdulillah
we don't we don't document this anymore
but we used to document it at one point
but we used to document it at one poin
to show that we as a Muslim Community
are doing good work we're helping out to
the disenfranchised and we're giving
back to the community that we live in
and we used to share the photos on the
IAC webpage so if you go back to late
2016-2017 you can find all of this there
a Time eventually came where we're no
longer doing this why because
subhanallah it became more about you
know congratulating the ISC for the work
that was being done as opposed to
recognizing the greater need in our
society to help people so the focus that
society to help people so the focus tha
was meant to be on the cause now became
on the one that's doing the work and
appreciating them as opposed to helping
more people do more good work so here
you can start off with a noble intention
but along the way your intention gets
distracted by you constantly sharing
everything that you do are you
constantly sharing everything that you
do so now his action items for this
section are number one self-reflection
have you ever gone somewhere with the
intent of taking a photo to share online
instead of the experience of visiting
that place we were discussing that uh
already I think that happens all the
time don't allow it to happen as much as
possible I understand there are certain
things that you go somewhere you want to
you want to document that I've been here
done that but look at your possible
intentions
number one I'm documenting this
for my own personal memory and I'll
share in the examples finally I just met
share in the examples finally I just me
a friend after like six or seven years
and we were talking about when was the
first time we actually met and I was
like yeah I remember the first time we
actually met it was in X Y and Z Spot
actually met it was in X Y and Z Spo
you know we had uh an ice cap right
you know we had uh an ice cap righ
after we and he's like yeah I remember
that and he's like how did you remember
that I'm like because when that happened
I took a picture of us together but when
I took that picture it wasn't for the
sake of posting it on social media like
I generally like to do things that if I
meet someone for the first time I was
like this is our first moments together
because like many years down the line as
you in fact yeah so when did we first
you in fact yeah so when did we firs
mee
and you may not actually remember that
and you may not actually remember tha
subhanallah but you can go onto your
phone go onto your feed check that
phone go onto your feed check tha
person's photos and you see their very
first photo yeah that was your first
first photo yeah that was your firs
meeting just for my own personal memory
so that's one possible intention that
so that's one possible intention tha
you have intention number two is that
you have intention number two is tha
you're taking it purely just for the
sake of post hitting it online and I
think this is where the problem actually
Rises
why do we post stuff purely for the sake
of online
like why is it important for us to be
socially validated to be you know have
as many likes as possible to have any as
many shares as possible to have as many
comments as possible now we as human
beings yes we are social beings we've
discussed that but why is it that this
is what we are constantly craving for as
opposed to real validation
why does it matter if 4 000 people who
do not know you at a personal level like
your picture
or not I want you to think about this
that when we passed away and it's
inevitable that we will all pass away
may Allah
I mean
how many of those people are going to
show up toward janaza
they're not
they're no
the people that are going to show up to
the janaza are the people that you've
had a personal impact on the people
whose lives you have touched the people
whose Community you were a part of these
are the people that are going to show up
to your janaza and that's something to
keep thinking about and that's how you
keep yourself in check that every time
you want to post something online just
you want to post something online jus
for the sake of likes and engagement
for the sake of likes and engagemen
you know think about that are the people
that I'm trying to please do they
actually care about my akhara don't
actually care about my akhara don'
actually care about my well-being are
they going to show up to my janaza
that's what you want to think about
that's what you want to think abou
so now can you post pictures online for
other intentions yes for the sake of
creating conversation for the sake of
educating for the sake of dialogue you
can post it for those reasons but don't
can post it for those reasons but don'
be shallow that you're just posting it
be shallow that you're just posting i
just for the likes and for the follows
and for the you know wow you look so
amazing with like uh you know an edited
picture and stuff like that subhanallah
number two he says the next time you
visit a place or do something you would
be tempted to document
be tempted to documen
focus on enjoying the moment without
focus on enjoying the moment withou
taking any photos not even for personal
memory so he's like a different
memory so he's like a differen
methodology he doesn't believe in the in
the concept or actually he tries to
mitigate the concept of personal
memories you don't need to document them
your mind will naturally
um you know remember them but if you
have a very scattered mind I don't think
there's anything wrong with taking those
pictures for personal memory but I do
agree with the point that focus on being
in the Here and Now
and enjoy that moment and if an
opportunity comes to take a picture take
the picture but don't make the picture
the primary purpose don't make the
picture the primary intent even if it is
for your own memory even if it is for
your own memory and Allah knows best
your own memory and Allah knows bes
we'll open up the floor for questions
and comments just uh for next week we'll
be talking about publicizing sins
we will be talking about family and we
will be talking about Envy so we have
some big topics coming up next week
and I open up the floor now for
questions comments concerns whatever's
on your mind
let's start with the sisters
questions comments concerns from the
sisters anything
I agree with everything that I said it
I agree with everything that I said i
was 100 factually correct and we're
going to implement everything
masha'allah
U Akbar Allah from the brothers
questions comments concerns
Bismillah
[Music]
foreign
Fair Point you know that's game set and
match
not because I need it
not because I need i
I have a different very fast okay
it was actually
achieve subhanallah so because you
didn't have an email address you
wouldn'
subhanallah so the uncle was trying to
buy a pair of shoes and I guess they
tried to register an account for him at
tried to register an account for him a
the cashier and they asked for Iman he's
like I don't have an email address he's
like sorry you can't buy the shoes
that's discrimination man that's like a
form of ageism
that's a form of ageism that's not fair
subhanallah Uncle we should file a
lawsuit let's do it
lawsuit let's do i
may Allah help us
Brothers go ahead in the back yeah
sometimes
he's 14 months older she'll go around
the house and teaching their phone
that's going to bring it to us and she's
like turned it on for me
Allah
U Akbar Allah
but this is such a so the the brother's
comment is with regards to a 14 month
old daughter that has basically learned
how to scroll and brings them their
phone and asks them to unlock it for her
you know this is um
a lesson in in parenting
in the sense of how much children follow
the example of their parents right I
think like that's my take away from it
think like that's my take away from i
that if we can teach them how to use a
phone at 14 months what else could we
possibly teach them for the positive
right like if we were just as engaged in
the positive habits
would they have picked those up as well
so I I don't have any like phenomenal
mind-blowing advice that this is what
mind-blowing advice that this is wha
you need to do and it's going to solve
our problems but it's just a reflection
that look this is the power of leading
by example and you've only had her for
14 months now
now for the rest of her life let's try
to direct her towards more positive
things right and you can take this as an
L like take it as a loss we've lost this
battle may Allah help us and it's not
battle may Allah help us and it's no
just you by the way I think all parents
are in the same boat like because we're
so constantly engaging with our phones
when our children see this they think
this is what
this is wha
it means to be human and this is what
it means to be human and this is wha
they they try to mimic and try to
replicate and it becomes even more
disastrous when rather than engaging
with them to keep them busy we give them
videos to watch even if they're Islamic
cartoons or or what else you know from a
very young age it starts to have an
impact on them
so if we can keep them engaged by
ourselves through activities Hands-On
activities coloring drawing painting
um you know in the shades that we sing
together things like that I think that
together things like that I think tha
would be a lot better
but I don't have any phenomenal advice
to share with you unfortunately continue
go ahead
my wife's family member
with that little time was just keep us
on the phone he's used to it and now she
wants to like talk on the fourth degree
even something small and if he has on it
even something small and if he has on i
wasn't important no I I'll give the
example of like soda like
this is just something that that used to
happen in my household that we used to
drink soda and we wouldn't let the kids
drink soda So eventually we started
drinking soda when they were asleep or
you know when they're not around so
similarly over here like a takeaway
could be if you want to use your phone
use your phone when they're not around
and they're not observing you like
they're in bed they're taking a nap
they're doing other activity use your
phone at that time but if everyone is
together try not to use the phone in
front of them that could be a possible
thing to explore inshallah
Bismillah
culture that is exploding right now yeah
you are very good at talking to people
why don't you have a presence oh I just
why don't you have a presence oh I jus
said that and like personally for me I'm
like I feel like the like
good if I mean
I mean a blog or whatnot or
present online and start conversations
but I feel like the damage on me
personally might be too much that I
don't know
any more effort but then sometimes you
get guilt truth it's just like you're
not doing enough for your game
so it's just kind of like what is your
opinion on that matter like if it's
right to then you know nothing needs
something because personally I'm not
something because personally I'm no
acting on social media much because if
you just you know too much sorry just
you just you know too much sorry jus
one second Brothers when someone's
asking a question we listen please
so it's just kind of like sometimes it
so it's just kind of like sometimes i
feels like
you get guilt troops for not being
present online because you could be
doing good online but you're choosing
not to and for me it's almost like a
protective measure that I take for
myself so it's kind of what is your
opinion on that I think that's very fair
so the sister's question is with regards
to you know if you're starting up a
business everyone's telling you you got
business everyone's telling you you go
to be online you got to be president you
got to be in people's faces that's how
you'd be relevant and then even from a
religious perspective they're like you
have so much to offer why don't you
share your reminders online
um so I you know I think that it fits in
really well with what we were discussing
today that everything has consequences
and you have to look at
and you have to look a
are the consequences worth
you know
what I'm getting in return so with
regards to Islamic education
um I think that's a fallacy like
if you want to make an impact on the on
the community you have to go into the
community interact with them and change
people and Mentor people and be there
for people and that's what positive
impact is going to be like I think there
is value in writing as well so if you
have the skills of writing starting off
with a blogs writing books writing
articles those don't require regular
engagement you post it and it's there
and people will continue to benefit and
perhaps those things are going to be
easier now with regards to building a
business you know this is one of the
things that as you build your business
in the beginning you may have to do it
in the beginning you may have to do i
yourself but as you build your capital
and as you build your team you can hire
a social media director and a social
media manager and let them focus on that
media manager and let them focus on tha
right like social media is not something
that we have to manage ourselves when we
run our businesses and in fact I'll
share inside scoop with you if you look
at every major Islamic speaker that's
out there I would say ninety percent of
them have social media managers and they
take clips and post it on them and the
Sheikh or the sheikha doesn't even like
bother looking at the comments and stuff
like that Allah knows best go ahead yep
what if someone online starts bullying
you or your friend
may Allah protect us that's not an easy
thing to deal with and I think in that
thing to deal with and I think in tha
sort of situation our natural reaction
may be to respond to them right away but
may be to respond to them right away bu
the best thing that you can do is go and
speak to your parents about it so speak
to your parents let them know what's
happening and then with your parent you
make a decision on do we want to tell
the school about this speak to the
guidance counselor speak to the
principal and you escalate it that way
but one of the worst things that you can
do is just keep it to yourself so if
someone's bullying you and you get
someone's bullying you and you ge
intimidated and you feel shy and you
feel like you know what I don't want to
tell anything about anyone about it
tell anything about anyone about i
that's the wrong thing to do one should
never feel ashamed for being bullied
even if it comes with a stigma so tell
your parents speak to the school
counselor escalated to the principal if
need to be and deal with it that way but
need to be and deal with it that way bu
never hide in the shame of being bullied
that's what I would suggest inshallah
Allah make it easy go ahead
um
yeah hey you know correct people
say that I'm not gonna yeah I'm
commanding quit forbidding people and
then they'll bring certain statements
but how about or uh confidence Scholars
be like oh look how you
so how like first of all what's wrong
with that type of thing and we know
people who are engaged
to tell them and when they are different
to tell them and when they are differen
like oh I'm not even doing nothing
okay
you know that's uh one of the challenges
of the online space is that people learn
a little bit and all of a sudden we
think we become Scholars overnight so
the brother's question is uh with
regards to people that justify
religiously uh shaming and criticizing
people publicly under the pretense of
enjoying good and forbidding evil so the
first thing I always tell people is that
first thing I always tell people is tha
there is no greater gift that Allah
gives to anyone the knowledge and that
gives to anyone the knowledge and tha
is your best defense in these sort of
situations
so when you look at the objectives of
Islamic law
when you
post something about someone you should
say see someone doing something wrong
is the goal to point out the fact that
is the goal to point out the fact tha
they're doing wrong or is the goal to
get them to change their behavior and to
repent to Allah when you take this
approach that you publicly criticize
someone know for a fact that getting
them to change their uh position their
stance and their behavior is very very
unlikely because no one likes to be
shamed publicly no one likes to be
called out and what that may do is not
called out and what that may do is no
only will it build a wedge between you
and this individual but depending on the
level of this person's Faith could build
a wedge between them and the dean of
Allah and how do you meet Allah with
something like that that you've created
a wedge between them and Allah and even
though it's not our fault people are
responsible for their own deed but
responsible for their own deed bu
sometimes we can be catalysts and we
want to be catalysts for good not
want to be catalysts for good no
Catalyst for evil number three
this Hadith of the Prophet salallahu
alaihi wasallam that says whoever
amongst you sees an evil let them change
it with their hand if you're unable to
do so speak out against it if you're
unable to do so hate it in your heart
unable to do so hate it in your hear
and that is the weakest of Iman
this Hadith itself has conditions the
first part of changing it with your hand
it requires that you have position and
Authority right
Authority righ
number two speaking out against it is
knowledge wisdom time and place right so
sometimes you have the right thing to
say but it's not the time to say it
say but it's not the time to say i
sometimes you have the right thing to
say and it is the right time because
you're alone and in private but you say
it harshly as opposed to being soft
it harshly as opposed to being sof
that's not the way to do it right and
sometimes it's in public instead of
being in private so all those things
have to be kept into consideration that
have to be kept into consideration tha
you learn from the fact of this Hadith
and the last thing is the prophet saw
has still given us that option that if
you're unable to then at the very least
you're unable to then at the very leas
you hate it with your heart because
sometimes you may not get the capability
to do that so that's sort of my uh my
two cents on that issue
I'll take one last question our brother
in the back go ahead
excellent so the brother's question is
in high school these days people have
the freedom to dress and act the way
that they want
that they wan
should we be judgmental with regards to
that particularly when people are
speaking about other people or what
speaking about other people or wha
should we do in that situation
you know in being in in high school in
this day and age it's tough man I
completely get that it's not like high
school during my time it's definitely
not high school during my parents time
and I just feel it's going to get
and I just feel it's going to ge
tougher and tougher so the first thing
that we want to always look at is how is
my relationship with Allah and how am I
doing with Allah that is number one
priority if I haven't got that on point
priority if I haven't got that on poin
and if I haven't fixed that I don't have
time to be concerned about other
people's problems number two is me
looking at the way people dress and act
looking at the way people dress and ac
if it's not impacting me and affecting
me why do I actually care what is the
point of caring now if the point is that
point of caring now if the point is tha
other people are talking about it and
other people are mentioning it
other people are mentioning i
we encourage those people mind your own
business focus on your relationship with
Allah if they don't change maybe we want
Allah if they don't change maybe we wan
to question why am I hanging out with
these people why are these people my
friends like what is it that we have in
common that we're actually hanging out
common that we're actually hanging ou
together now the third and last thing to
do is
give people the benefit of the doubt
give people the benefit of the doub
some people genuinely don't know and
this is fine Allah you know when you
study early books of Islamic tradition
there were things that people used to
say
that they're known by necessity like you
have to pray five times a day you know
you have to give as a cat you have to
wear hijab all of these things they will
considered known by necessity
but the level of ignorance in
accumulation with overload of useless
information has made people ignorant
information has made people ignoran
about their Deen and we can't really
change that by judging people right so I
would say give people the benefit of the
doubt that maybe these people don't know
any better if the opportunity arises
speak to them about it like I think one
of the best things that happened to me
was having Juma in school in high school
right if that doesn't exist in your high
school try to bring that a vote and then
this challenge is that Muslims are
facing in your high school try to
address that in the right I think that's
one of the best things that can be done
go ahead yeah
everybody
in that sort of situation this
non-muslim friend that you have tell
them that yeah you know there's always
things that we could do better and maybe
one day she will do it better for the
time being you know let's just hope that
time being you know let's just hope tha
she learns right try to frame into
something positive like that
something positive like tha
right and again like in that sort of
situation I think it's a bit different
situation I think it's a bit differen
than what I was talking about you can't
than what I was talking about you can'
say maybe we should just you know focus
on our own relationship with Allah
because you could like talk smack you're
like dude you're uncover that's worse
than the way she's dressed but that
than the way she's dressed but tha
wouldn't make sense to him right so
let's not focus on that but I think
focus on the positive of like you know
what let's just hope that she changes
her ways and and she becomes better
right that's the way I would frame it
right that's the way I would frame i
may Allah make it easy folks let's
conclude over there inshallah
subhanallah
next week 7 30 we have those three
topics hope to see you all then